chore: document the map block (#755)
mineiros-io/terramate: docs/map.md

# map block

> The `map` block can be used to declare complex objects inside 
> [Globals](sharing-data.md) and it's useful when aggregating or merging lists
> of objects that potentially can have duplicated keys.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `map` block can be used to create complex maps/objects inside 
[Globals](sharing-data.md). It can be used to aggregate lists
of objects into maps that have duplicated keys and need a defined way of deep merging values of the same key.
```

> Let's get started with a very simple (yet useless) example, just to introduce
> the `map` components:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following is a very basic example introducing the `map` block inside a `globals` block:
```

```hcl

> globals {
>     map obj {
>         for_each = [
>             {name="a", value=5},
>             {name="c", value=0},
>             {name="a", value=15},
>             {name="b", value=5},
>             {name="c", value=20},
>         ]
>         iterator = elem
>         key = elem.new.name
>         value {
>             value = elem.new.value
>             previous = tm_try(elem.old.value, null)
>         }
>     }
> }

Reviewer: please format HCL according to the style:
- indent of 2
- aligned `=`

```suggestion
globals {
  map obj {
    for_each = [
      {name="a", value=5},
      {name="c", value=0},
      {name="a", value=15},
      {name="b", value=5},
      {name="c", value=20},
    ]

    iterator = elem
    key      = elem.new.name

    value {
      value    = elem.new.value
      previous = tm_try(elem.old.value, null)
    }
  }
}
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

```

The code above will result in the `global.obj` defined below:

```hcl
obj = {
  a = {
    previous = 5
    value    = 15
  }
  b = {
    previous = null
    value    = 5
  }
  c = {
    previous = 0
    value    = 20
  }
}

> 
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

```

> The `map` will iterate over the value in `for_each`, setting the iterator variable (`elem` in this case) with the **new** and **old** value for the
> provided `key`. If the `iterator` attribute is not set, then the default
> iterator name is `element`. The `element.new` contains the current iterated
> value and the `element.old` contains the previous value stored for the current
> `key`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `map` will iterate over the values in `for_each`, setting the iterator variable (`elem` in this case, `element` by default) with the `elem.new` and `elem.old` values for the
provided `key`. The `elem.new` contains the current iterated
value and the `elem.old` contains the values of the previous iteration of the current
`key`.
```

Now it's time for a more useful example.

Have a look in the `global.orders` list declared below:

```

> globals {
>     orders = [
>         {name = "Morpheus", product = "sunglass", price = 100.5},
>         {name = "Trinity",  product = "cape", price = 82.30},
>         {name = "Trinity",  product = "necklace", price = 25.0},
>         {name = "Trinity",  product = "sunglass", price = 100.5},
>         {name = "Anderson", product = "ollydbg", price = 30},
>         {name = "Morpheus", product = "boot", price = 65},
>         {name = "Anderson", product = "cape", price = 82.30},
>         {name = "Morpheus", product = "sunglass", price = 145.50},
>     ]
> }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
globals {
  orders = [
    {name = "Morpheus", product = "sunglass", price = 100.5},
    {name = "Trinity",  product = "cape",     price = 82.30},
    {name = "Trinity",  product = "necklace", price = 25.0},
    {name = "Trinity",  product = "sunglass", price = 100.5},
    {name = "Anderson", product = "ollydbg",  price = 30},
    {name = "Morpheus", product = "boot",     price = 65},
    {name = "Anderson", product = "cape",     price = 82.30},
    {name = "Morpheus", product = "sunglass", price = 145.50},
  ]
}
```

```

> Let's say you would like to aggregate those values by `name`, then you can do it
> with the `map` block as defined below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's aggregate those values by `name`, by using the `map` block as defined below:
```

```

> map totals {
>         for_each = global.orders
>         key = element.new.name
>         value {
>             total_spent = tm_try(element.old.total_spent, 0) + element.new.price
>         }
>     }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
globals {
  map totals {
    for_each = global.orders

    key = element.new.name
    
    value {
      total_spent = tm_try(element.old.total_spent, 0) + element.new.price
    }
  }
}
```

```

> Which will result in the object below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Which will result in the global object below:
```

```
totals = {
  Anderson = {
    total_spent = 112.3
  }
  Morpheus = {
    total_spent = 311
  }
  Trinity = {
    total_spent = 207.8
  }
}
```

> But you can aggregate even further by using nested `map` blocks and then
> aggregate by `product` for each `name`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using nested `map` blocks and then aggregate by `product` for each `name` can be achieved using the following: 
```

Example:

```hcl
globals {
    map totals {
        for_each = global.orders
        key = element.new.name
        value {
            total_spent = tm_try(element.old.total_spent, 0) + element.new.price

            map per_product {
               for_each = [for v in global.orders : v if v.name == element.new.name]
               key = element.new.product
               value {
                   total = tm_try(element.old.total, 0) + element.new.price
               }

>             }

Reviewer: can't we use element.old.per_product somehow?

what is the context of `for_each` here? element.old and element.new are the values of the outer block? 

we should set a second iterator to make this example more readable..

can't we do something like: `for_each = [ .... element.old.per_product... element.new.... ]` as we just want to extend the old per_product map? I will try it out later ;)

Author: > can't we use element.old.per_product somehow?

inside the nested map or from outside? From outside it's already supported but the problem is how to merge them. Just did this:

```
globals {
  map totals {
    for_each = global.orders
    key = element.new.name
    value {
      total_spent = tm_try(element.old.total_spent, 0) + element.new.price
      per_product = tm_can(element.old.per_product) ? tm_merge(element.old.per_product, {
              "${element.new.product}" = {
                  total = tm_try(element.old.per_product[element.new.product].total, 0) + element.new.price
              }
          }) : {
              "${element.new.product}" = {
                  total = element.new.price
              }
          }
    }
  }
}
```

if `element.old.per_product` already exists, it merges it but provides a new object for the current `element.new.product` using the old value (if any) to recompute the total. But the merge is overwriting old keys...
Any idea why?

Author: as both the outer and inner map blocks iterate over `orders`, I don't know which iterator names to give them.. ideas? @mariux

Reviewer: inner and outer? ;)

Reviewer: or `per_name` and `per_product` ?

> globals {
>     map totals {
>         for_each = global.orders
>         key = element.new.name
>         value {
>             total_spent = tm_try(element.old.total_spent, 0) + element.new.price
> 
>             map per_product {
>                for_each = [for v in global.orders : v if v.name == element.new.name]
>                key = element.new.product
>                value {
>                    total = tm_try(element.old.total, 0) + element.new.price
>                }
>             }
>         }
>     }
> }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
globals {
  map totals {
    for_each = global.orders

    key = element.new.name

    value {
      total_spent = tm_try(element.old.total_spent, 0) + element.new.price

      map per_product {
        for_each = [for v in global.orders : v if v.name == element.new.name]
      
        key = element.new.product

        value {
          total = tm_try(element.old.total, 0) + element.new.price
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```
